
QUIJANO: Good evening. From Longwood University in Farmville, Virginia, and welcome to the first, and only, vice presidential debate of 2016, sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates.
KAINE: Elaine, thank you for being here tonight, and, Governor Pence, welcome. It is so great to be back at Longwood University in Farmville, Virginia.
QUIJANO: Governor Pence?
PENCE: Well, first off, thank you, Elaine, and thank you to — thank you to Norwood University for their wonderful hospitality and the Commission on Presidential Debates. It’s deeply humbling for me to be here, to be surrounded by my — my wonderful family.
QUIJANO: Senator Kaine, on the campaign trail, you praised Secretary Clinton’s character, including her commitment to public service, yet 60 percent of voters don’t think she’s trustworthy. Why do so many people distrust her? Is it because they have questions about her e-mails and the Clinton Foundation?
KAINE: Elaine, let me tell you why I trust Hillary Clinton. Here’s what people should look at as they look at a public servant. Do they have a passion in their life that showed up before they were in public life? And have they held onto that passion throughout their life, regardless of whether they were in office or not, succeeding or failing?
QUIJANO: Governor Pence, let me ask you, you have said Donald Trump is, quote, “thoughtful, compassionate, and steady.” Yet 67 percent of voters feel he is a risky choice, and 65 percent feel he does not have the right kind of temperament to be president. Why do so many Americans think Mr. Trump is simply too erratic?
PENCE: Well, let me — let me say first and foremost that, Senator, you and Hillary Clinton would know a lot about an insult-driven campaign. It really is remarkable. At a time when literally, in the wake of Hillary Clinton’s tenure as secretary of state, where she was the architect of the Obama administration’s foreign policy, we see entire portions of the world, particularly the wider Middle East, literally spinning out of control. I mean, the situation we’re watching hour by hour in Syria today is the result of the failed foreign policy and the weak foreign policy that Hillary Clinton helped lead in this administration and create. The newly emboldened — the aggression of Russia, whether it was in Ukraine or now their heavy-handed approach…
KAINE: You guys love Russia. You both have said…
PENCE: … their heavy-handed approach.
KAINE: You both have said — you both have said Vladimir Putin is a better leader than the president.
PENCE: Well…[crosstalk]
QUIJANO: Well, we’re going to get to Russia in just a moment. But I do want to get back to the question at…
PENCE: But in the midst — Elaine, thank you. Thank you. Thank you, Senator, I’ll…
KAINE: These guys have praised Vladimir Putin as a great leader. How can that…[crosstalk]
QUIJANO: Yes, and we will get to that, Senator. We do have that coming up here. But in the meantime, the questions…
PENCE: Well, Senator, I must have hit a…[crosstalk]…I must have hit a nerve here.
QUIJANO: Why the disconnect?
PENCE: Because at a time of great challenge in the life of this nation, where we’ve weakened America’s place in the world, stifled America’s economy, the campaign of Hillary Clinton and Tim Kaine has been an avalanche of insults.
KAINE: And paid few taxes and lost a billion a year.
QUIJANO: And why the disconnect with your running mate?
PENCE: But there’s a — there’s a reason why people question the trustworthiness of Hillary Clinton. And that’s because they’re paying attention. I mean, the reality is, when she was secretary of state, Senator, come on. She had a Clinton Foundation accepting contributions from foreign governments.
KAINE: You are Donald Trump’s apprentice. Let me talk about this…[crosstalk]
PENCE: Senator, I think I’m still on my time.
KAINE: Well, I think — isn’t this a discussion?
QUIJANO: This is our open discussion.
KAINE: Yeah, let’s talk about the state of…[crosstalk]
PENCE: Well, let me interrupt — let me interrupt you and finish my sentence, if I can.
KAINE: Finish your sentence.
PENCE: The Clinton Foundation accepted foreign contributions from foreign governments and foreign donors while she was secretary of state.
KAINE: OK, now I can weigh in. Now…
PENCE: She had a private server…
KAINE: Now, I get to weigh in. Now, let me just say this…
PENCE: … that was discovered…[crosstalk]
QUIJANO: … Senator, you have an opportunity to respond.
PENCE: … keep that pay to play process out of the reach of the public.
KAINE: Governor Pence — Governor Pence doesn’t think the world’s going so well and he, you know, is going to say it’s everybody’s fault.
PENCE: Do you?
KAINE: Let me tell you this. When Hillary Clinton became secretary of state, Governor Pence, do you know that Osama bin Laden was alive?
PENCE: Yes.
KAINE: Do you know that we had 175,000 troops deployed in the battlefield in Iraq and Afghanistan? Do you know that Iran was racing toward a nuclear weapon and Russia was expanding its stockpile?
PENCE: Eliminate the Iranian nuclear weapons program?
KAINE: Absolutely, without firing a shot. And instead of 175,000 American troops deployed overseas, we now have 15,000.
PENCE: Right and…
KAINE: These are very, very good things.
PENCE: And Iraq has been overrun by ISIS, because Hillary Clinton failed to renegotiate…
KAINE: Well, if you want to put more American troops in Iraq, you can propose that.
PENCE: Hillary Clinton — Hillary Clinton — Hillary Clinton failed to renegotiate a status of forces agreement…
KAINE: No, that is incorrect. That’s incorrect.
PENCE: And so we removed — we removed all of our…
QUIJANO: Gentlemen, we’ll get to…[crosstalk]
PENCE: … troops from Iraq, and ISIS was able to be conjured up in that vacuum.
KAINE: But I’d like to correct…
PENCE: … and overrun vast areas of Iraq.
KAINE: Governor, President Bush said we would leave Iraq at the end of 2011. And, Elaine, Iraq didn’t want our troops to stay, and they wouldn’t give us the protection for our troops. And guess what? If a nation where our troops are serving does not want us to stay, we’re not going to stay without their protection.
PENCE: It was a failure of the secretary of state…
QUIJANO: We need to move on to the next topic, gentlemen.
KAINE: If Governor Pence wants to put more troops back in Iraq, that’s…
QUIJANO: There are a lot of people wondering in this country about the economy. Let’s turn to the issue of the economy.
KAINE: OK.
QUIJANO: According to the nonpartisan Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, neither of your economic plans will reduce the growing $19 trillion gross national debt. In fact, your plans would add even more to it.
PENCE: I think the fact that — that under this past administration of which Hillary Clinton was a part, we’ve almost doubled the national debt is atrocious. I mean, I’m very proud of the fact that — I come from a state that works. The state of Indiana has balanced budgets. We cut taxes, we’ve made record investments in education and in infrastructure, and I still finish my term with $2 billion in the bank.
QUIJANO: Senator Kaine?
KAINE: Elaine, on the economy, there’s a fundamental choice for the American electorate. Do you want a “you’re hired” president in Hillary Clinton or do you want a “you’re fired” president in Donald Trump? I think that’s not such a hard choice.
QUIJANO: On that point, Governor Pence, recently the New York Times released part of Mr. Trump’s 1995 tax return and reported that he could have avoided paying federal income taxes for years. Yesterday, Mr. Trump said he brilliantly used the laws to pay as little tax as legally possible. Does that seem fair to you?
PENCE: Well, first, let me say, I appreciated the “you’re hired,” “you’re fired” thing, Senator. You use that a whole lot. And I think your running mate used a lot of pre-done lines.
KAINE: Fifteen million new jobs?
PENCE: … slowest economic recovery since the Great Depression.
KAINE: Fifteen million new jobs?
QUIJANO: Governor…[crosstalk]
PENCE: There are millions more people living in poverty today than the day that Barack Obama with Hillary Clinton at his side…
KAINE: And the poverty level and the median income…
PENCE: … stepped into the Oval Office.
KAINE: … improved dramatically between 2014 and 2015.
PENCE: You — honestly, Senator, you can roll out the numbers and the sunny side, but I got to tell you, people in Scranton know different. People in Fort Wayne, Indiana, know different. I mean, this economy is struggling. The answer to this economy is not more taxes.
KAINE: But it’s not the giveaway tax relief to the folks at the top.
PENCE: It’s not more spending…[crosstalk]
KAINE: I am interested to hear whether he’ll defend his running mate’s not releasing taxes and not paying taxes.
PENCE: Absolutely I will.
QUIJANO: Governor, with all due respect, the question was about whether it seems fair to you that Mr. Trump said he brilliantly used the laws to pay as little tax as legally possible.
PENCE: Well, this is probably the difference between Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton and Senator Kaine. And, I mean, Hillary Clinton and Senator Kaine — God bless you for it, career public servants, that’s great — Donald Trump is a businessman, not a career politician. He actually built a business.
KAINE: But why won’t he release his tax returns?
PENCE: Well, we’re answering the question about — about a business thing, is he…
KAINE: I do want to come back to that, but…
PENCE: His tax returns — his tax returns showed he went through a very difficult time, but he used the tax code just the way it’s supposed to be used. And he did it brilliantly.
KAINE: How do you know that? You haven’t seen his tax returns.
PENCE: He created a runway — because he’s created a business that’s worth billions of dollars today.
KAINE: How do you know that?
PENCE: And with regard to paying taxes, this whole riff about not paying taxes and people saying he didn’t pay taxes for years, Donald Trump has created tens of thousands of jobs. And he’s paid payroll taxes, sales taxes, property taxes…
KAINE: Elaine, let me talk about something.
QUIJANO: Senator, I’m going to give you about 30 seconds to respond, and I have question on Social Security for you.
KAINE: OK.
PENCE: The only issue on taxes — Hillary Clinton is going to raise taxes, and Donald Trump and I are going to cut them.
KAINE: Donald Trump started this campaign in 2014 and he said, “If I run for president, I will absolutely release my taxes.” He’s broken his first…
PENCE: And he will.
KAINE: He’s broken his first promise. Second, he stood on the stage…
PENCE: He hasn’t broken his promise. He said he’s…
KAINE: He stood on the stage last week and when Hillary said, you haven’t been paying taxes, he said, “That makes me smart.” So it’s smart not to pay for our military? It’s smart not to pay for veterans? It’s smart not to pay for teachers? And I guess all of us who do pay for those things, I guess we’re stupid. And the last thing I’ll say is this…
PENCE: Senator, do you take all the deductions that you’re entitled to?
KAINE: The last thing — the last thing I want to ask Governor Pence is…
PENCE: I do.
KAINE: Governor Pence had to give Donald Trump his tax returns to show he was qualified to be vice president. Donald Trump must give the American public his tax returns to show that he’s qualified to be president. And he’s breaking his promise.
PENCE: Elaine, I have to respond to this.
QUIJANO: You get very little time, 20 seconds.
PENCE: I’ll be — I’ll be very respectful.
QUIJANO: Governor?
PENCE: Look, Donald Trump has filed over 100 pages of financial disclosure, which is what the law requires.
KAINE: But he said he would release his tax returns.
QUIJANO: All right, Gentlemen…
PENCE: The American people can review that. And he’s going — Senator, he’s going to release his tax returns when the audit is over…
QUIJANO: … I need to ask you about Social Security…
KAINE: Richard Nixon released tax returns when he was under audit.
PENCE: They’re going to raise your taxes. We’re going to cut your taxes.
QUIJANO: Gentlemen…
KAINE: If you can’t meet Nixon’s standard…
QUIJANO: The people at home cannot understand either one of you when you speak over each other. I would please ask you to wait until it is that the other is finished.
KAINE: All right. We’re having fun up here.
QUIJANO: Senator Kaine, on the issue of Social Security, in 18 years, when the Social Security Trust Funds run out of money, you’ll be 76. The Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget estimates your benefits could be cut by as much as $7,500 per year. What would your administration do to prevent this cut?
KAINE: First, we’re going to protect Social Security, which is one of the greatest programs that the American government has ever done. It happened at a time when you would work your whole life, your whole life, raising your kids, working, being a Little League coach or a Sunday school teacher, and then you would retire into poverty. And Social Security has enabled people to retire with dignity and overwhelmingly not be in poverty.
QUIJANO: Governor Pence, I’ll give you an opportunity to respond.
PENCE: Well, thanks, Elaine. There they go again. OK…
KAINE: Go read — go read the book.
PENCE: All Donald Trump — all Donald Trump and I have said about Social Security is we’re going to meet our obligations to our seniors. That’s it.
KAINE: Go read the book.
PENCE: We’ve said we’re going to meet the obligations of Medicare. That’s what this campaign is really about, Senator. And I get, this is — this is the old scare tactic that they roll out…
KAINE: But — but you have a voting record, Governor.
PENCE: And I get all of that. I just, look…
KAINE: I…
PENCE: There’s a question that you asked a little bit earlier that I want to go back to.
KAINE: I can’t believe that you won’t defend your own voting record.
PENCE: I have to go back to.
QUIJANO: We…
PENCE: Well, look, I — you’re running with Hillary Clinton, who wants to raise taxes by $1 trillion, increase spending by $2 trillion, and you say you’re going to keep the promises of Social Security. Donald Trump and I are going to cut taxes. We’re going to — we’re going to — we’re going to…
KAINE: You’re not going to cut taxes. You’re going to raise taxes on the middle class.
PENCE: … reform government programs so we can meet the obligations of Social Security and Medicare.
QUIJANO: All right. PENCE: Stay on the path that your party has us on, we’re going to be in a — in a mountain range of debt. And we’re going to face hard choices and…[crosstalk]
KAINE: You did ask this question about debt, and the debt explosion on the Trump plan is much, much bigger than anything on the Clinton side.
QUIJANO: All right. Let me move on now…
PENCE: Three hundred and five economists said your plan is bad for the economy.
QUIJANO: … to the issue of law enforcement and race relations. Law enforcement and race relations. After the Dallas police shooting, Police Chief David Brown said, quote, “We’re asking cops to do too much in this country. Every societal failure we put it off on the cops to solve. Not enough mental health funding, not enough drug addiction funding, schools fail, let’s give it to the cops.”
KAINE: Elaine, I think that’s a very fair comment. I think we put a lot on police shoulders. And this is something I got a lot of scar tissue and experience on.
QUIJANO: Governor Pence?
PENCE: You know, my uncle was a cop, a career cop, on the beat in downtown Chicago. He was my hero when I was growing up. And we’d go up to visit my dad’s family in Chicago. My three brothers and I would marvel at my uncle when he would come out in his uniform, sidearm at his side.
KAINE: Can I — can I explain…
PENCE: … I just think what we ought to do is we ought to stop seizing on these moments of tragedy. We ought to assure the public that we’ll have a full and complete and transparent investigation whenever there’s a loss of life because of police action. But, Senator, please, you know, enough of this seeking every opportunity to demean law enforcement broadly by making the accusation of implicit bias every time tragedy occurs.
KAINE: Elaine — Elaine, people shouldn’t be afraid to bring up issues of bias in law enforcement. And if you’re afraid to have…
PENCE: I’m not afraid to bring that up.
KAINE: And if — if you’re afraid to have the discussion, you’ll never solve it. And so here’s — here’s an example, heartbreaking. We would agree this is a heartbreaking example.
PENCE: We need criminal justice reform.
KAINE: Well, we do.
PENCE: Indiana has passed criminal justice reform.
KAINE: But I just want to say, those who say that we should not…
PENCE: But that’s not what you’re talking about.
KAINE: … we should not be able to bring up and talk about bias in the system, we’ll never solve the problem…
QUIJANO: Governor Pence…[crosstalk]…Governor Pence…
PENCE: Senator, when African-American police officers involved in a police action shooting involving an African-American, why would Hillary Clinton accuse that African-American police officer of implicit bias?
KAINE: Well, I guess I can’t believe you are defending the position that there is no bias and it’s a topic we don’t even…[crosstalk]
QUIJANO: Governor Pence, I have a question on that point.
PENCE: I did not make that statement. I…
QUIJANO: Your fellow Republican, Governor Pence, Senator Tim Scott, who is African-American, recently spoke on the Senate floor. He said he was stopped seven times by law enforcement in one year.
KAINE: A U.S. senator.
QUIJANO: He said, “I have felt the anger, the frustration, the sadness, and the humiliation that comes with feeling like you’re being targeted for nothing more than being just yourself.” What would you say to Senator Scott about his experiences?
PENCE: Well, I have the deepest respect for Senator Scott, and he’s a close friend. And what I would say is that we — we need to adopt criminal justice reform nationally. I — I signed criminal justice reform in the state of Indiana, Senator, and we’re very proud of it.
KAINE: Elaine, can I…
QUIJANO: So what would you say to Senator Scott, Governor?
PENCE: Law enforcement in this country is a force for good. They are the — they truly are people that put their lives on the line every single day. But I would — I would suggest to you, what we need to do is assert a stronger leadership at the national level to support law enforcement. You just heard Senator Kaine reject stop-and-frisk. Well, I would suggest to you that the families that live in our inner cities that are besieged by crime…
KAINE: Elaine, let me — let me…
QUIJANO: Governor, the question is about Senator Scott. What would — what would you tell Senator Scott?
KAINE: Elaine, if I could — if I could jump in. I’ve heard Senator Scott make that eloquent plea. And look, criminal justice is about respecting the law and being respected by the law. So there is a fundamental respect issue here.
QUIJANO: All right. I want to turn to our next segment now, immigration. Your running mates have both said that undocumented immigrants who have committed violent crimes should be deported. What would you tell the millions of undocumented immigrants who have not committed violent crimes? Governor Pence?
PENCE: Donald Trump’s laid out a plan to end illegal immigration once and for all in this country. We’ve been talking it to death for 20 years. Hillary Clinton and Tim Kaine want to continue the policies of open borders, amnesty, catch and release, sanctuary cities, all the things that are driving — that are driving wages down in this country, Senator, and also too often with criminal aliens in the country, it’s bringing heartbreak.
But I have to tell you, I just — I was listening to the avalanche of insults coming out of Senator Kaine a minute ago. KAINE: These were Donald’s — hold on a second, Governor.
PENCE: It’s my time, Senator.
QUIJANO: It is, in fact, the governor’s time.
KAINE: I apologize. It’s your two minutes. I apologize.
PENCE: Thanks. I forgive you. He says ours is an insult-driven campaign. Did you all just hear that? Ours is an insult-driven campaign?
QUIJANO: Governor…
PENCE: That’s small potatoes compared to Hillary Clinton…
QUIJANO: Senator Kaine?
PENCE: …. calling half of Donald Trump’s supporters a basket of deplorables.
KAINE: Hillary Clinton said something on the campaign trail, and the very next day, she said, you know what, I shouldn’t have said that.
PENCE: She said she shouldn’t have said half.
QUIJANO: Governor, this is Senator Kaine’s two minutes, please.
KAINE: Yeah, that’s right, so now we’re even.
PENCE: Yeah. [laughter]
KAINE: Look for Donald Trump apologizing to John McCain for saying he wasn’t a hero…
PENCE: Oh…
KAINE: … to Donald Trump apologizing for calling women slobs, pigs, dogs, disgusting.
PENCE: She apologized for saying “half.”
QUIJANO: Governor. It is his two minutes, please.
KAINE: Did Donald Trump apologize for taking after somebody in a Twitter war and making fun of her weight? Did he apologize for saying African-Americans are living in Hell? Did he apologize for saying President Obama was not even a citizen of the United States? You will look in vain to see Donald Trump ever taking responsibility for anybody and apologizing.
PENCE: That’s nonsense. That’s nonsense.
KAINE: I cannot believe that Governor Pence would sit here and defend his running mate’s claim that we should create a deportation force to — so that they’ll all be gone.
PENCE: Senator, we have a deportation force. It’s called Immigrations and Customs Enforcement. And the union for Immigrations and Customs Enforcement for the first time in their history endorsed Donald Trump to be the next president of the United States of America.
KAINE: So you like the 16 million deportations?
PENCE: Senator, that’s — that’s nonsense. Look, what you just heard is they have a plan for open borders, amnesty. That’s…[crosstalk]
KAINE: Our plan is like Ronald Reagan’s plan from 1986.
PENCE: They call it comprehensive immigration reform — they call it comprehensive immigration reform on Capitol Hill. We all know the routine. It’s amnesty. And you heard one of the last things he mentioned was border security.
KAINE: No, I…
PENCE: They always say we’re going to do this, we’re going to do that, we’ll eventually get the border…[crosstalk]
KAINE: … border security three years ago, and Governor Pence was against it.
QUIJANO: Governor, Mr. Trump has said…
PENCE: Ronald Reagan said a nation without borders is not a nation. Donald Trump is committed to restoring the borders of this nation and securing our nation, enforcing our laws.
QUIJANO: So, Governor, how would these millions of undocumented immigrants leave? Would they be forcibly removed?
PENCE: Well, I think Donald Trump laid out a series of priorities that doesn’t ends with border security. It begins with border security. And after we secure the border, not only build a wall, but beneath the ground and in the air, we do internal enforcement.
KAINE: I just have to correct Governor Pence….
PENCE: … where people can come into this country.
KAINE: I have to…
PENCE: That’s the order that you should do it. Border security, removing criminal aliens, upholding with law, and then — but then, Senator, I’ll work you when you go back to the Senate, I promise you, we’ll work with you to reform the immigration system.
KAINE: I look forward to working together in whatever capacities we serve in. But I just want to make it very, very clear that he’s trying to fuzz up what Donald Trump has said. When Donald Trump spoke in Phoenix, he looked the audience in the eye and he said, no, we’re building a wall, and we’re deporting everybody. He said, quote, “They will all be gone.” “They will all be gone.” And this is one of these ones where you can just go to the tape on it and see what Donald Trump has said. And to add…
PENCE: He’s talking about criminal aliens.
KAINE: And to add to it, and to add to it, and to add to it, we are a nation of immigrants. Mike Pence and I both are descended from immigrant families. Some things, you know, maybe weren’t said so great about the Irish when they came, but we’ve done well by absorbing immigrants, and it’s made our nation stronger.
QUIJANO: Gentleman, I’d like to shift now to the threat of terrorism. Do you think the world today is a safer or more dangerous place than it was eight years ago? Has the terrorist threat increased or decreased? Senator Kaine?
KAINE: The terrorist threat has decreased in some ways, because bin Laden is dead. The terrorist threat has decreased in some ways because an Iranian nuclear weapons program has been stopped. The terrorist threat to United States troops has been decreased in some ways because there’s not 175,000 in a dangerous part of the world. There’s only 15,000.
PENCE: Oh, please. Come on.
KAINE: … and Saddam Hussein. And last and most dangerously, Donald Trump believes — Donald Trump believes that the world will be safer if more nations have nuclear weapons. He’s said Saudi Arabia should get them, Japan should get them, Korea should get them. And when he was confronted with this, and told, wait a minute, terrorists could get those, proliferation could lead to nuclear war, here’s what Donald Trump said, and I quote: “Go ahead, folks, enjoy yourselves.”
QUIJANO: Governor Pence?
PENCE: Did you work on that one a long time? Because that had a lot of really creative lines in it.
KAINE: Well, I’m going to see if you can defend any of it.
PENCE: Well, look, I can defend — I — I — I can — I can make very clear to the American people, after traveling millions of miles as our secretary of state, after being the architect of the foreign policy of this administration, America is less safe today than it was the day that Barack Obama became president of the United States. It’s absolutely inarguable.
KAINE: I was in Virginia where the Pentagon’s…[crosstalk]
PENCE: I know you were. We all lived through that day as a nation. It was heartbreaking. And I want to give this president credit for bringing Osama bin Laden to justice.
KAINE: Stopping a nuclear weapons program without firing a shot?
PENCE: You didn’t stop the nuclear weapons program.
KAINE: Yes, we did.
PENCE: You essentially…
KAINE: Even the Israeli military says it stopped.
PENCE: … guaranteed that Iran will someday become a nuclear power, because there’s no limitations once the period of time of the treaty comes off.
QUIJANO: Governor Pence, Mr. Trump has proposed extreme vetting of immigrants from parts of the world that export terrorism. But that does not address many of the recent terrorist attacks in the United States, such as the Orlando nightclub massacre and the recent bombings in New York and New Jersey. Those were homegrown, committed by U.S. citizens and legal residents. What specific tools would you use to prevent those kinds of attacks?
PENCE: Well, I think it’s — I think it’s a great question, Elaine, but it really does begin with us reforming our immigration system and putting the interests, particularly the safety and security of the American people, first.
KAINE: Elaine, I want to…[crosstalk]
QUIJANO: Governor, the question was about homegrown.
PENCE: Yeah, and so — but first, you know, let’s make sure we’re putting the safety and security of the American people first instead of Hillary Clinton expanding the Syrian refugee program…
KAINE: Or instead of you violating the Constitution by blocking people based on their national origin rather than whether they’re dangerous.
PENCE: That’s not — that’s absolutely false.
KAINE: That’s what the Seventh Circuit decided just — here’s the difference, Elaine.
PENCE: The Seventh Circuit…
KAINE: We have different views on — on refugee issues and on immigration. Hillary and I want to do enforcement based on, are people dangerous? These guys say all Mexicans are bad.
PENCE: That’s absolutely false.
KAINE: And with respect to refugees, we want to keep people out if they’re dangerous. Donald Trump said keep them out if they’re Muslim. Mike Pence…
PENCE: Absolutely…
KAINE: … put a program in place to keep them out if they’re from Syria. And yesterday an appellate court with three Republican judges struck down the Pence plan…
PENCE: Right. Right.
KAINE: … and said it was discriminatory…
PENCE: And those judges — those judges said…
KAINE: We should focus upon danger, not upon discrimination.
QUIJANO: Governor?
PENCE: Elaine, to your point, those judges said it was because there wasn’t any evidence yet that — that ISIS had infiltrated the United States. Well, Germany just arrested three Syrian refugees that were connected to ISIS.
KAINE: But they told you there’s a right way and a wrong way to do it.
PENCE: But, look, if you’re going to be critical of me on that, that’s fair game. I will tell you, after two Syrian refugees were involved in the attack in Paris that is called Paris’ 9/11, as governor of the state of Indiana, I have no higher priority than the safety and security of the people of my state.
KAINE: But, Governor Pence…
PENCE: So you bet I suspended that program.
KAINE: But, Governor Pence, I just…
PENCE: And I stand by that decision. And if I’m vice president of the United States or Donald Trump is president, we’re going to put the safety and security of the American people first.
KAINE: Sure. Can we just be clear — Hillary and I will do immigration enforcement and we’ll vet refugees based on whether they’re dangerous or not. We won’t do it based on discriminating against you from the country you come from or the religion that you practice.
PENCE: But the problem with that…
KAINE: That is completely antithetical to the Jeffersonian values of…[crosstalk]
PENCE: Elaine, the director of the FBI, our homeland security, said we can’t know for certain who these people are coming from Syria.
KAINE: Yes, we can, and when we don’t let them know, we don’t let them in.
PENCE: So — the FBI…
KAINE: When we don’t know who they are, we don’t let them in.
PENCE: The FBI and homeland security said we can’t know for certain. You’ve got to err on the side of the safety and security of the American people, Senator. I understand the…
KAINE: By trashing all Syrians or trashing all Muslims?
PENCE: … the U.N. wants us to expand the Syrian refugee program…
QUIJANO: Senator Kaine, let me ask you this. Secretary Clinton…
PENCE: We’re going to put the safety and security of the American people first.
QUIJANO: … has talked about an intelligence surge.
KAINE: Yes.
QUIJANO: What exactly would an intelligence surge look like? And how would that help identify terrorists with no operational connection to a foreign terrorist organization?
KAINE: Intelligence surge is two things, Elaine. It’s two things. It’s, first, dramatically expanding our intelligence capacities by hiring great professionals, but also we’ve got some of the best intel and cyber employees in the world right here in the United States working for many of our private sector companies.
PENCE: That’s not his plan. KAINE: Well, he said NATO is obsolete. And, look, if you put aside — push aside your alliances, who you’re going to share intelligence with? Hillary Clinton is the secretary of state who knows how to build alliances. She built the sanctions regime around the world that stopped the Iranian nuclear weapons program. And that’s what an intelligence surge means. Better skill and capacity, but also better alliances.
QUIJANO: All right. I’d like to turn now to the tragedy in Syria. Two hundred fifty thousand…
PENCE: Can I speak about the cybersecurity surge at all?
QUIJANO: You can — you can have 30 seconds, Governor, quickly, please.
PENCE: First, Donald Trump just spoke about this issue this week. We have got to bring together the best resources of this country to understand that cyber warfare is the new warfare of the asymmetrical enemies that we face in this country. And I look forward if I’m privileged to be in this role of working with you in the Senate to make sure that we resource that effort.
KAINE: We will work together in whatever roles we inhabit.
PENCE: We have an intelligence, sir. But I will also tell you that it’s important in this moment to remember that Hillary Clinton had a private server in her home that had classified information on it…
QUIJANO: And I don’t — 30 seconds is on up.
PENCE: … about drone strikes, e-mails from the president of the United States of America were on there.
QUIJANO: Right.
PENCE: Her private server was subject to being hacked by foreign…[crosstalk]
QUIJANO: I’d like to ask you about Syria, Governor.
PENCE: We could put cybersecurity first if we just make sure the next secretary of state doesn’t have a private server.
KAINE: A full investigation concluded that not one reasonable prosecutor would take any additional step. You don’t get to decide the rights and wrongs of this. We have a justice system that does that. And a Republican FBI director did an investigation and concluded that…[crosstalk]
QUIJANO: All right, we are moving on now. Two hundred fifty thousand people…
PENCE: If your son or my son handled classified information the way Hillary Clinton did…
QUIJANO: … one hundred thousand of them children — Governor…
PENCE: … they’d be court martialed.
KAINE: That is absolutely false and you know that.
PENCE: Absolutely true.
KAINE: And you know that, Governor.
QUIJANO: Governor…
PENCE: It’s absolutely true.
QUIJANO: Gentlemen, please.
KAINE: Because the FBI did an investigation.
QUIJANO: Gentlemen.
KAINE: And they concluded that there was no reasonable prosecutor who would take it further. Sorry.
QUIJANO: Senator Kaine, Governor Pence, please.
KAINE: Syria.
QUIJANO: I want to turn now to Syria. Two hundred fifty thousand people, 100,000 of them children, are under siege in Aleppo, Syria. Bunker buster bombs, cluster munitions, and incendiary weapons are being dropped on them by Russian and Syrian militaries. Does the U.S. have a responsibility to protect civilians and prevent mass casualties on this scale, Governor Pence?
PENCE: The United States of America needs to begin to exercise strong leadership to protect the vulnerable citizens and over 100,000 children in Aleppo. Hillary Clinton’s top priority when she became secretary of state was the Russian reset, the Russian reset. After the Russian reset, the Russians invaded Ukraine and took over Crimea.
QUIJANO: Governor, your two minutes are up.
PENCE: We’ve just got to have American strength on the world stage. When Donald Trump becomes president of the United States, the Russians and other countries in the world will know they’re dealing with a strong American president.
QUIJANO: Senator Kaine?
KAINE: Hillary and I also agree that the establishment of humanitarian zones in northern Syria with the provision of international human aid, consistent with the U.N. Security Council resolution that was passed in February 2014, would be a very, very good idea.
PENCE: Well, that offended me.
KAINE: Governor Pence just said — Governor Pence just said that Donald Trump will rebuild the military. No, he won’t. Donald Trump is avoiding paying taxes. The New York Times story — and we need to get this — but the New York Times suggested that he probably didn’t pay taxes for about 18 years starting in 1995. Those years included the years of 9/11.
QUIJANO: The question was about Aleppo, Senator.
KAINE: He wouldn’t support troops. He wouldn’t — he wouldn’t support — this is important, Elaine. When a guy running for president will not support the troops, not support veterans, not support teachers, that’s really important.
QUIJANO: Right.
KAINE: And I said about Aleppo, we do agree the notion is we have to create a humanitarian zone in northern Syria. It’s very important.
QUIJANO: Governor Pence, you had mentioned a no-fly zone. Where would you propose setting up a safe zone specifically? How would you keep it safe?
PENCE: Well, first and foremost, Donald Trump supports our troops. Donald Trump supports our veterans.
KAINE: He won’t pay taxes.
PENCE: Donald Trump has paid all the taxes that he’s — do you not take deductions? How does that work?
QUIJANO: Gentlemen, this is about Syria. I’d like to…[crosstalk]
PENCE: Honestly, Senator. Honestly, Senator.
KAINE: It is about our troops. It is about our troops.
PENCE: I understand why you want to change — I understand why you want to change the subject.
KAINE: How can you support the troops if you won’t pay taxes?
PENCE: I understand why you want to change the subject. And let me be very clear on this Russian thing. The larger question here…
KAINE: Do you think Donald Trump is smart to not pay taxes?
QUIJANO: Gentlemen, we’re going to have time to get to Russia here.
PENCE: What we’re dealing with is the — you know, there’s an old proverb that says the Russian bear never dies, it just hibernates. And the truth of the matter is, the weak and feckless foreign policy of Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama has awakened an aggression in Russia that first appeared a few years ago with their move in Georgia, now their move into Crimea, now their move into the wider Middle East.
QUIJANO: And exactly how would those safe zones work? How would they remain safe?
PENCE: The — the safe zones would have to be — as the senator said, there’s already a framework for this that’s been recognized by the international community. The United States of America needs to be prepared to work with our allies in the region to create a route for safe passage and then to protect people in those areas, including with a no-fly zone.
KAINE: Well, let me — let me come back…
PENCE: … is deeply troubling to me. That will all change the day Donald Trump becomes president of the United States.
KAINE: … and talk about — let me talk about the things that Governor Pence doesn’t want to acknowledge, Elaine. He doesn’t want to acknowledge that we stopped the Iranian nuclear weapons program. He doesn’t want to acknowledge…
PENCE: You didn’t.
KAINE: … that Hillary was part of the team that got bin Laden. He doesn’t want to acknowledge…
PENCE: I just did.
KAINE: … that it’s a good thing, not a bad thing, that it’s a good thing — not a bad thing — that we’re down from 175,000 troops deployed overseas to 15,000.
PENCE: And come on. Senator. Senator, that was even beneath you and Hillary Clinton. And that — that’s pretty low.
KAINE: But do you — do you think — do you think we should have — more nuclear weapons in the world will make us safer?
PENCE: Senator, the…
KAINE: That’s what Donald Trump thinks.
PENCE: Ronald Reagan also said nuclear war should never be fought because it can never be won. And the United States of America needs to make investments in modernizing our nuclear force for both deterrence…
KAINE: But can you defend Donald Trump’s claim that more nations should get nuclear weapons?
PENCE: … and assurance to our allies. But let me go back to this Iran thing. I mean, he keeps saying that they prevented — that Hillary Clinton started the deal with the Iranians prevented Iran from getting a nuclear weapon.
KAINE: That’s what the Israeli joint chiefs of staff is saying right now.
PENCE: Well, that’s not what — that’s not what Israel thinks.
KAINE: Gadi Eizenkot, you can go check it.
PENCE: You wouldn’t necessarily know that.
KAINE: Go to the tape.
PENCE: I know you boycotted Prime Minister Netanyahu’s speech when he came before the Congress.
KAINE: No, I visited him in his office. I visited him in his office.
PENCE: You boycotted the speech. The point is, what this Iran — so-called Iran deal did was essentially guarantee — I mean, when I was in Congress, I fought hard on a bipartisan basis with Republican and Democrat members to move forward the toughest sanctions, it — literally in the history of the United States, against Iran.
KAINE: And then Hillary used them to get a deal.
PENCE: We were bringing them to heel, but the goal was always that we would only lift the sanctions if Iran permanently renounced their nuclear ambitions.
KAINE: Elaine, let me just mention one thing.
PENCE: They have not — Elaine, let me finish a sentence. They have not renounced their nuclear ambitions. And when the deal’s period runs out, there’s no limitation on them obtaining weapons. That…[crosstalk]
QUIJANO: And very quickly, Senator.
KAINE: Elaine…
PENCE: … and the fact that they got $1.7 billion in a ransom payment…
QUIJANO: We need to talk about Russia. Very quickly, though, Senator, please.
PENCE: … is astonishing to the American people.
KAINE: Six times tonight, I have said to Governor Pence I can’t imagine how you can defend your running mate’s position on one issue after the next. And in all six cases, he’s refused to defend his running mate.
PENCE: Well, let’s — no, no, don’t put words in my mouth.
QUIJANO: All right.
PENCE: He’s going…[crosstalk]
KAINE: And yet he is asking everybody to vote for somebody that he cannot defend. And I just think that should be underlined.
PENCE: No, I’m — look…[crosstalk]
QUIJANO: All right, gentlemen, let’s talk about Russia. This is a topic that has come up.
PENCE: I’m very, very happy to defend Donald Trump. If he wants to take these one at a time, I’ll take them one at a time.
QUIJANO: I will give you an opportunity to do that.
KAINE: More nations should get nuclear weapons. Try to defend that.
PENCE: Don’t put words in my mouth. Well, he never said that, Senator.
KAINE: He absolutely said it. Saudi Arabia, South Korea, Japan.
PENCE: Most of the stuff you’ve said, he’s never said.
QUIJANO: Gentlemen, Russia. Russian President Vladimir Putin invaded Ukraine, annexed Crimea, and has provided crucial military support to the Assad regime. What steps, if any, would your administration take to counter these actions? Senator Kaine?
KAINE: You’ve got to be tough on Russia. So let’s start with not praising Vladimir Putin as a great leader. Donald Trump and Mike Pence have said he’s a great leader. And Donald Trump has business…
PENCE: No, we haven’t.
KAINE: … has business dealings — has business dealings with Russia that he refuses to disclose. Hillary Clinton has gone toe-to-toe with Russia. She went toe-to-toe with Russia as secretary of state to do the New START Agreement to reduce Russia’s nuclear stockpile. She’s had the experience doing it.
PENCE: Oh, that’s nonsense.
KAINE: He was on a TV show a couple months back, and he said, “I’ll guarantee you this, Russia’s not going into the Ukraine.” And he had to be reminded that they had gone into the Crimea two years before.
PENCE: He knew that.
KAINE: Hillary Clinton has gone toe-to-toe with Russia to work out a deal on New START. She got them engaged in a meaningful way to cap Iran’s nuclear weapons program. And yet she stood up to them on issues such as Syria and their invasion of Georgia. You’ve got to have the ability to do that, and Hillary does.
PENCE: But what’s it got to do with Russia?
KAINE: Every president since Richard Nixon has done it, and Donald Trump has said I’m doing business with Russia. The only way the American public will see whether he has a conflict of interest…
PENCE: No, he hasn’t said that.
KAINE: He has, actually.
QUIJANO: Senator, your time is up. Governor?
PENCE: Well, thanks. I’m just trying to keep up with the insult-driven campaign on the other side of the table.
KAINE: You know, I’m just saying facts about your running mate.
PENCE: Yeah.
KAINE: And I know you can’t defend.
QUIJANO: Senator, please. This is the governor’s two minutes.
PENCE: I’m happy to defend him, Senator. Don’t put words in my mouth that I’m not defending him.
KAINE: You’re not.
PENCE: I’m happy to defend him. Most of what you said is completely false, and the American people know that.
KAINE: I’ll run through the list of things where you won’t defend…
PENCE: This isn’t the old days where you can just say stuff and people believe it.
QUIJANO: Senator, please. This is Governor Pence’s two minutes.
PENCE: Look, this is the alternative universe of Washington, D.C., versus reality. Hillary Clinton said her number-one priority was a reset with Russia. That reset resulted in the invasion of Ukraine, after they’d infiltrated with what are called little green men, Russian soldiers that were dressing up like Ukrainian dissidents, and then they moved all the way into Crimea, took over the Crimean Peninsula. Donald Trump knew that happened. He basically was saying it’s not going to happen again. The truth of the matter is that what you have in the rise of aggressive Russia, which has had — increased its influence in Iran, that’s now — now because of this deal is on a pathway in the future to obtain a nuclear — the leading state sponsor of terror in the world in Iran now has a closer working relationship with Russia because of Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama’s foreign policy and $150 billion and sanctions all being lifted.
KAINE: We wiped out the leader of Al Qaida.
PENCE: … on the day that Iran released four American hostages…
KAINE: We stopped Iran from getting nuclear weapons.
QUIJANO: Governor…
PENCE: … we delivered $400 million in cash as a ransom payment for Americans held by the radical mullahs in Tehran.
QUIJANO: Governor, yesterday, Mr. Trump said…
KAINE: And we stopped a nuclear weapons program without a shot.
QUIJANO: … quote, “Putin has no respect for Hillary Clinton and no respect for Obama.” Why do you think he’ll respect a Trump-Pence administration?
PENCE: Strength. Plain and simple.
KAINE: Business dealings.
PENCE: Donald Trump — that’s nonsense. Donald Trump is a strong leader…
KAINE: Donald Trump’s son says that the Trump organization…
PENCE: … who is going to lead with American strength.
QUIJANO: Please, Senator, I’ll give you a chance to respond.
PENCE: We’re going to rebuild our military. And let me — let me — this whole Putin thing. Look, America is stronger than Russia. Our economy is 16 times larger than the Russian economy. America’s political system is superior to the crony, corrupt capitalist system in Russia in every way.
QUIJANO: Senator Kaine?
PENCE: … of Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama.
KAINE: Well, this is one where we can just kind of go to the tape on it. But Governor Pence said, inarguably, Vladimir Putin is a better leader than President Obama.
PENCE: That is absolutely inaccurate.
KAINE: And — and — and I just think a guy who praises…
PENCE: He said he’s stronger — he’s been stronger on the world stage.
KAINE: No, he said leader. And if — and I’ll just say this, Governor.
PENCE: You just said better.
KAINE: If you mistake leadership for dictatorship, and you can’t tell the difference, a country that’s running its economy into the ground…
PENCE: Yeah, here we go. This is the grade school thing again?
KAINE: … persecuting journalists…
PENCE: Right, this is grade school.
KAINE: … if you can’t tell the difference, you shouldn’t be commander-in-chief.
PENCE: Yeah.
KAINE: And with Donald Trump — Donald Trump’s sons say that they have all these business dealings with Russia. Those could be disclosed with tax returns, but they refuse to do them. Americans need to worry about whether Donald Trump will be watching out for America’s bottom line or his own bottom line.
QUIJANO: Senator Kaine, what went wrong with the Russia reset?
KAINE: Vladimir Putin. Vladimir Putin is a dictator.
QUIJANO: And what would do you differently?
KAINE: Vladimir Putin is a dictator. He’s not a leader. Anybody who thinks otherwise doesn’t know Russian history and they don’t know Vladimir Putin. Hillary Clinton knows exactly who this guy is. John McCain said, I look in his eyes and I see KGB. And Hillary kind of has that same feeling.
PENCE: Right.
KAINE: So how do deal with him? You’ve got to — we do have to deal with Russia in a lot of different ways. There are areas where we can cooperate. So it was Hillary Clinton who worked with Russia on the New START Treaty to reduce their nuclear weapons stockpile. It was Hillary Clinton that worked with Russia to get them engaged in a community of nations to stop the Iranian nuclear weapons program without firing a shot.
QUIJANO: All right, I’d like to ask now about North Korea, Iran and the threat of nuclear weapons. North Korea recently conducted its fifth and most powerful nuclear test.
PENCE: Right.
QUIJANO: What specific steps would you take to prevent North Korea from developing a nuclear-armed missile capable of reaching the United States? Governor Pence?
PENCE: Well, first, we need to — we need to make a commitment to rebuild our military, including modernizing our nuclear forces. And we also need — we also need an effective American diplomacy that will marshal the resources of nations in the Asian Pacific Rim to put pressure on North Korea, on Kim Jong-un, to abandon his nuclear ambitions. It has to remain the policy of the United States of America the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula, plain and simple.
KAINE: Until he…[crosstalk]
PENCE: … done well in some focus group. But here — Hillary Clinton and her husband set up a private foundation called the Clinton Foundation. While she was secretary of state, the Clinton Foundation accepted tens of millions of dollars from foreign governments and foreign donors.
QUIJANO: Governor, your two minutes are up.
PENCE: … the reason the American people don’t trust Hillary Clinton is because they are looking at the pay to play politics that she operated with the Clinton Foundation through a private server…
QUIJANO: Governor, please.
PENCE: … while she’s secretary of state.
QUIJANO: Your two minutes are up, Governor.
PENCE: And they’re saying enough is enough.
QUIJANO: Senator Kaine?
KAINE: I’m going to talk about the foundation, and then I’ll talk about North Korea. So, on the foundation. I am glad to talk about the foundation. The Clinton Foundation is one of the highest- rated charities in the world. It provides AIDS drugs to about 11.5 million people. It helps Americans deal with opioid overdoses. It gets higher rankings for its charity than the American Red Cross does. The Clinton Foundation does an awful lot of good work.
PENCE: The Trump Foundation is a non-profit.
KAINE: In addition, Donald Trump has a foundation. The foundation was just fined for illegally contributing foundation dollars to a political campaign of a Florida attorney general. They made an illegal contribution, and then they tried to hide it by disguising it to somebody else. And the person they donated to was somebody whose office was charged with investigating Trump University.
QUIJANO: Governor, I will give you 30 seconds to respond, because I know you want to, but, again, I would remind you both this was about North Korea. [laughter]
PENCE: Well, thank you. Thank you. The Trump Foundation is a private family foundation. They give virtually every cent in the Trump Foundation to charitable causes.
KAINE: Political contributions?
PENCE: Less than ten cents on the dollar in the Clinton Foundation has gone to charitable causes.
KAINE: A $20,000 portrait of Donald Trump? PENCE: Less than 10 cents on the dollar of the Clinton Foundation has gone to charitable causes.
KAINE: Ninety percent.
PENCE: It has been a platform for the Clintons to travel the world, to have staff. But honestly, Senator, we would know a lot more about it if Hillary Clinton would just turn over the 33,000 e-mails…
QUIJANO: All right, let’s turn back to North Korea…
PENCE: … that she refused to turn over in her private server…
QUIJANO: Senator Kaine…
PENCE: … and we’d have a much better picture of what the Clinton Foundation was about.
QUIJANO: Senator Kaine, if you had intelligence that North Korea was about to launch a missile, a nuclear-armed missile capable of reaching the United States, would you take preemptive action?
KAINE: If we — look, a president should take action to defend the United States against imminent threat. You have to. A president has to do that. Now exactly what action, you would have to determine what your intelligence was, how certain you were of that intelligence, but you would have to take action.
QUIJANO: All right. I’d like to turn to our next segment now. And in this, I’d like to focus on social issues. You have both been open about the role that faith has played in your lives. Can you discuss in detail a time when you struggled to balance your personal faith and a public policy position? Senator Kaine?
KAINE: Yeah, that’s an easy one for me, Elaine. It’s an easy one. I’m really fortunate. I grew up in a wonderful household with great Irish Catholic parents. My mom and dad are sitting right here. I was educated by Jesuits at Rockhurst High School in Kansas City. My 40th reunion is in 10 days.
QUIJANO: Governor Pence?
PENCE: Well, it’s a wonderful question. And my Christian faith is at the very heart of who I am. I was also raised in a wonderful family of faith. It was a church on Sunday morning and grace before dinner.
KAINE: That’s shared.
PENCE: But for me, I would tell you that for me the sanctity of life proceeds out of the belief that — that ancient principle that — where God says before you were formed in the womb, I knew you, and so for my first time in public life, I sought to stand with great compassion for the sanctity of life.
KAINE: Elaine, this is a fundamental question, a fundamental question. Hillary and I are both people out of religious backgrounds, from Methodist church experience, which was really formative for her as a public servant.
PENCE: No, it’s really not. Donald Trump and I would never support legislation that punished women who made the heartbreaking choice to end a pregnancy.
KAINE: Then why did Donald Trump say that?
PENCE: We just never would.
KAINE: Why did he say that?
PENCE: Well, look, it’s — look, he’s not a polished politician like you and Hillary Clinton. And so…
KAINE: Well, I would admit that’s not a polished…[crosstalk]
PENCE: You know, things don’t always come out exactly the way he means them.
KAINE: Well, can I say…
PENCE: But I’m telling you what the policy of our administration would be.
KAINE: Great line from the — great line from the gospel of Matthew. From the fullness of the heart, the mouth speaks.
PENCE: Yeah.
KAINE: When Donald Trump says women should be punished or Mexicans are rapists and criminals…
PENCE: I’m telling you…
KAINE: … or John McCain is not a hero, he is showing you who he is.
PENCE: Senator, you’ve whipped out that Mexican thing again. He — look…
KAINE: Can you defend it?
PENCE: There are criminal aliens in this country, Tim, who have come into this country illegally who are perpetrating violence and taking American lives.
KAINE: You want to — you want to use a big broad brush against Mexicans on that?
PENCE: He also said and many of them are good people. You keep leaving that out of your quote. And if you want me to go there, I’ll go there.
KAINE: This is important —
PENCE: … bring the — let’s welcome the children into our world. There are so many families around the country who can’t have children. We could improve adoption…
KAINE: But, Governor…
PENCE: … so that families that can’t have children can adopt more readily those children from crisis pregnancies.
KAINE: Governor, why don’t you trust women to make this choice for themselves? We can encourage people to support life. Of course we can. But why don’t you trust women? Why doesn’t Donald Trump trust women to make this choice for themselves?
PENCE: Because there are…
KAINE: … but on fundamental issues of morality, we should let women make their own decisions.
PENCE: Because there is — a society can be judged by how it deals with its most vulnerable, the aged, the infirm, the disabled, and the unborn. I believe it with all my heart. And I couldn’t be more proud to be standing with a pro-life candidate in Donald Trump.
QUIJANO: I do have one final question for you both tonight. It has been a divisive campaign. Senator Kaine, if your ticket wins, what specifically are you going to do to unify the country and reassure the people who voted against you?
KAINE: That’s a really important one. That may be the $64,000 question, because it has been a divisive campaign. And again, Hillary is running a campaign about stronger together, and Donald Trump — and this is — this is not directed at this man, except to the extent that he can’t defend Donald Trump — Donald Trump has run a campaign that’s been about one insult after the next.
QUIJANO: Governor, how will you unify the country if you win?
PENCE: Well, thank you, Elaine, and thanks for a great discussion…
KAINE: Absolutely.
PENCE: … tonight. Thank you, Senator.
QUIJANO: All right, gentlemen, thank you so much.
QUIJANO: Good evening. From Longwood University in Farmville, Virginia, and welcome to the first, and only, vice presidential debate of 2016, sponsored by the Commission on Presidential Debates.